feat(curriculum): add hash table lab (#59545)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/25-front-end-development/lab-hash-table/67ed03ac474c48692f41749e.md

---
id: 67ed03ac474c48692f41749e
title: Build a Hash Table
challengeType: 23
dashedName: build-a-hash-table
---

# --description--

In this lab, you will build a hash table from scratch. A hash table is a data structure that stores key-value pairs. A hash table works by taking the key as an input and then hashing this key according to a specific hashing function. 

For the purpose of this lab, the hashing function will be simple: it will sum the Unicode values of each character in the key. The hash value will then be used as the actual key to store the associated value. The same hash value would also be used to retrieve and delete the value associated with the key.

**Objective:** Fulfill the user stories below and get all the tests to pass to complete the lab.

**User Stories:**

1. You should define a class named `HashTable` with a `collection` property initialized as an empty dictionary inside its `__init__` method. The `collection` dictionary should store key-value pairs based on the hashed value of the key.

2. The `HashTable` class should have four instance methods: `hash`, `add`, `remove`, and `lookup`.

3. The `hash` method should:

>     - Take `string` as a parameter.

Author: I specified the parameter as I am not sure how to test if a generic parameter exists.

Here we are specifying how to define the `hash` method so, it should be parameter instead of argument.

>     - Take `string` as a parameter.

Reviewer: > I specified the parameter as I am not sure how to test if a generic parameter exists.

call the function with one argument, if it gives error, then the function has the wrong number of parameters

>     - Take `string` as a parameter.

Reviewer: chai has `throws` and `doesNotThrow`, you may be able to wrap the `runPython` with one of those

>     - Take `string` as a parameter.

Author: I have used inspect to write new tests.

4. The `add` method should:

    - Take a key-value pair -`key`, `val` as parameters and compute the hash of the key.
    - Use the computed hashed value to store the key-value pair inside the `collection` dictionary. 
    - If multiple keys produce the same hash value, their key-value pairs should be stored in a nested dictionary under the same hash value.

5. The `remove` method should:

    - Take `key` as a parameter and compute its hash.
    - Remove the corresponding key-value pair from the hash table.

6. The `lookup` method should:

    - Take `key` as a parameter.
    - Compute the hash of the key, and return the corresponding value stored inside the hash table. 
    - If the key does not exist in the collection, it should return `None`.

7. When you add `("rose", "flower")` to the hash table, the `collection` should look like this:

    ```md
    {
        441: {
            "rose": "flower"
        }
    }
    ```

8. When you add a key that hashes to the same value as an existing key, like `"fcc"` and `"cfc"`, the `collection` should look like this:

    ```md
    {
        300: {
            "fcc": "coding",
            "cfc": "chemical"
        }
    }

>     ```

Author: Added these as tests.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class("HashTable").find_function("add").has_args("self,key,val")`)) })
```

The `HashTable` class should have a `remove` method.

```js
({test: () => {assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class('HashTable').has_function('remove')`))}})
```

The `remove` method should take `key` as a parameter.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class("HashTable").find_function("remove").has_args("self,key")`)) })
```

The `HashTable` class should have a `lookup` method.

```js
({test: () => {assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class('HashTable').has_function('lookup')`))}})
```

The `lookup` method should take `key` as the parameter.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class("HashTable").find_function("lookup").has_args("self,key")`)) })
```

`HashTable.hash("golf")` should return `424`.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
        ht = HashTable()
        hash_result = ht.hash("golf")
        assert hash_result == 424

        # prevent hardcoding
        assert ht.hash("dear") == 412
        assert ht.hash("cat") == 312
    `) 
})
```

> `HashTable.add("golf", "sport")` should add the key-value pair to the collection at index `424`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`HashTable.add("golf", "sport")` should add the key-value pair to the collection at key `424`.
```

```js

({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()
    ht.add("golf", "sport")
    expected_value = {424: {'golf': 'sport'}}

>     assert ht.collection == expected_value

Reviewer 2: This is never satisfied because my dictionary will never be that dictionary. I haven't checked the remaining tests yet.

Reviewer: ```py
d1 = {1: {2: "two"}}
d2 = {1: {2: "three"}}
def deepEqualDict(d1, d2):
    for (k1,v1), (k2,v2) in zip(d1.items(), d2.items()):
        if k1 != k2:
            return False
        if type(v1) == dict and type(v2) == dict:
            if not deepEqualDict(v1, v2):
                return False
        elif v1 != v2:
            return False
    
    return True
        
        
deepEqualDict(d1, d2)
```

a function like this would be needed for testing if two dictionaries are the same

Reviewer 2: You're right, my bad :facepalm: I was too sure about that because the test was failing but everything seemed fine. I had a typo...

    ht.add("dear", "friend")
    ht.add("read", "book")

    expected_value = {
        "dear": "friend",
        "read": "book"
    }

    assert ht.collection.get(412) == expected_value
    `) 
})
```

When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair exists in the hash table, `HashTable.remove("golf")` should remove the key-value pair from the collection.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()
    ht.add("golf", "sport")

    expected_value_before_removal = {
        "golf": "sport"
    }

    index = ht.hash("golf")

    assert ht.collection.get(index) == expected_value_before_removal

    ht.remove("golf")

    assert "golf" not in ht.collection.get(index, {})
    `) 
})
```

When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair exists in the hash table, `HashTable.lookup("golf")` should return `"sport"`.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()

    ht.add("golf", "sport")

    expected_value = "sport"
    assert ht.lookup("golf") == expected_value
    `) 
})

```

When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair does not exist in the collection, `HashTable.lookup("golf")` should return `None`.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
        ht = HashTable()

>         ht.remove("golf")
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This can be removed because `ht` is a new instance, so its `collection` should be empty.

Because of this I found something we need to test. I've written a `remove` method that throws when the key to remove is not in the collection and this test was failing, but none of the tests for `remove`.

So I think we should require that when the key does not exists in the collection, `remove` should not raise an exception. What do you think?

Author: I have modified the instruction for `remove` and also added a few more tests.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`
    import inspect 
    ht= HashTable()
    sig = inspect.signature(ht.add)
    len(sig.parameters) == 2
  `))
})
```

The `HashTable` class should have a `remove` method.

```js
({test: () => {assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class('HashTable').has_function('remove')`))}})
```

The `remove` method should take a key as a parameter.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`
    import inspect 
    ht= HashTable()
    sig = inspect.signature(ht.remove)
    len(sig.parameters) == 1
  `))
})
```

When you try to remove a key that does not exist in the collection, it should not raise an error or remove anything.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
        ht = HashTable()
        ht.add("rose", "flower")
        index = ht.hash("rose")
        original = ht.collection.copy()

        ht.remove("tulip")

        assert ht.collection == original
        assert "rose" in ht.collection[index]
        assert "tulip" not in ht.collection.get(index, {})
    `) 
})
```

When the hash value is same, the `remove` method should only remove that key and not the entire hash table for that hash value.

```js
({
  test: () => runPython(`

>     ht = HashTable()

Reviewer 2: The hint says you should only remove the key, but this is actually checking that the hashed value is removed from the table. Also, I would expect two key-value pairs stored at the same hash value in this test.

Not sure if we need to change the hint, the test, or both.

Author: I have reworded the hint a bit and added two key-value pairs with the same hash.

    ht.add("rose", "flower")
    index = ht.hash("rose")

    assert index in ht.collection

    ht.remove("rose")

    assert index not in ht.collection
  `)
})
```

The `HashTable` class should have a `lookup` method.

```js
({test: () => {assert(runPython(`_Node(_code).find_class('HashTable').has_function('lookup')`))}})
```

The `lookup` method should take a key as the parameter.

```js
({ test: () => assert(runPython(`
    import inspect 
    ht= HashTable()
    sig = inspect.signature(ht.lookup)
    len(sig.parameters) == 1
  `))
})
```

> `HashTable.hash("golf")` should return `424`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`HashTable.hash('golf')` should return `424`.
```

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
        ht = HashTable()
        hash_result = ht.hash("golf")
        assert hash_result == 424

        # prevent hardcoding
        assert ht.hash("dear") == 412
        assert ht.hash("cat") == 312
    `) 
})
```

> `HashTable.add("golf", "sport")` should add the key-value pair to the collection at key `424`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`HashTable.add('golf', 'sport')` should add the key-value pair to the collection at key `424`.
```

```js

({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()
    ht.add("golf", "sport")
    expected_value = {424: {'golf': 'sport'}}

    assert ht.collection == expected_value
    `) 
})
```

> `HashTable.add("dear", "friend")` and `HashTable.add("read", "book")` should add both the key-value pairs to the collection at index `412` as a nested dictionary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`HashTable.add('dear', 'friend')` and `HashTable.add('read', 'book')` should add both the key-value pairs to the collection at index `412` as a nested dictionary.
```

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
 
    ht = HashTable()

    ht.add("dear", "friend")
    ht.add("read", "book")

    expected_value = {
        "dear": "friend",
        "read": "book"
    }

    assert ht.collection.get(412) == expected_value
    `) 
})
```

> When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair exists in the hash table, `HashTable.remove("golf")` should remove the key-value pair from the collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `golf` key exists in the hash table, `HashTable.remove('golf')` should remove the `golf` key from the collection.
```
I wouldn't mention the value because it doesn't matter in this case. And in practice removing a key or removing a key-value pair means the same thing.

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()
    ht.add("golf", "sport")

    expected_value_before_removal = {
        "golf": "sport"
    }

    index = ht.hash("golf")

    assert ht.collection.get(index) == expected_value_before_removal

    ht.remove("golf")

    assert "golf" not in ht.collection.get(index, {})
    `) 
})
```

> When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair exists in the hash table, `HashTable.lookup("golf")` should return `"sport"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `'golf', 'sport'` key-value pair exists in the hash table, `HashTable.lookup('golf')` should return `sport`.
```

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
    ht = HashTable()

    ht.add("golf", "sport")

    expected_value = "sport"
    assert ht.lookup("golf") == expected_value
    `) 
})

```

> When the `"golf", "sport"` key-value pair does not exist in the collection, `HashTable.lookup("golf")` should return `None`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `'golf', 'sport'` key-value pair does not exist in the collection, `HashTable.lookup('golf')` should return `None`.
```

```js
({ 
    test: () => runPython(`
        ht = HashTable()
        assert ht.lookup("golf") is None
`) })

```

> When you add `("rose", "flower")` to the hash table, its `collection` attribute should look like this: `{ 441: { "rose": "flower" }}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you add `('rose', 'flower')` to the hash table, its `collection` attribute should look like this: `{ 441: { 'rose': 'flower' }}`.
```

})
```

> If multiple keys hash to the same index, the `remove` method should only delete the specific key-value pair and not the entire list of pairs at that index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If multiple keys hash to the same index, the `remove` method should only delete the specific key-value pair and not the entire dictionary at that index.
```

})
```

> When a key exists in the hash table, `HashTable.remove()` should remove the key-value pair from the collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a key exists in the hash table, the `remove()` method should remove the given key and its corresponding value from the collection.
```

```

> When you add `("rose", "flower")` to the hash table, the `collection` should look like this: `{ 441: { "rose": "flower" }}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you add `("rose", "flower")` to the hash table, its `collection` attribute should look like this: `{ 441: { "rose": "flower" }}`.
```
